This morning, I thought we’d talk about accepting
the facts about our figurative heart
and how that safeguards
our relationship with Jehovah.
Let’s read the day’s text
in its entirety
in Jeremiah chapter 17.
And what a sobering inspired thought
from our heavenly Father!
Jeremiah chapter 17
and we’ll read verse 9:
“The heart is more treacherous
than anything else and is desperate.”
So there we have it.
That’s the truth.
That’s what Jehovah makes very clear to us
—that each and every one of us
has to deal with a treacherous,
or deceitful, figurative heart.
And how encompassing
the expression here
“more treacherous than anything else.”
And what complicates it even more
is that it’s desperate.
It always wants its way
—so a lot to meditate on.
And now,
Jehovah put it here for the very reason
that we have to accept this fact.
And to safeguard our relationship with him,
we have to accept that this is the case.
And you could be a fine Christian for many years
—mature, nice outlook, nice attitude.
But if you ever find yourself
forgetting Jehovah’s estimation
of what we have within us,
in our figurative heart,
then we’re in danger
because the Devil will always exploit
the fact that our imperfect figurative hearts
are treacherous and deceitful
more than anything else
and are desperate.
So accept that fact.
It’s not that we want to dwell on it,
and you start feeling,
‘Well, what a miserable person I am!’
Even though that is something
the apostle Paul acknowledged,
it’s just accepting the fact.
And then we’re cautious about allowing
the treacherous heart to lead us astray.
Now, perhaps you haven’t thought
about this in a while,
but notice what Jesus said
—a fundamental truth for all of us—
here in Matthew chapter 6
and what we sometimes
refer to as the model prayer.
Matthew chapter 6
(and a lot of spiritual food for thought,
of course, anything Jesus said
is spiritual food for thought)
and verse 13 of Matthew chapter 6:
“And do not bring us into temptation,
but deliver us from the wicked one.”
So it’s been there for all these years.
We could personally reflect on,
‘When was the last time we mentioned
that in a prayer to our Father, Jehovah:
‘“Do not bring us into temptation
but deliver us from the wicked one,”
or “rescue us from the wicked one”?’
What are we really saying there?
Well, we’re asking our heavenly Father
to guide and help us
so that we’re not “overreached by Satan”
—very simple.
But the closer we get to the end,
make no mistake, it’s even more urgent
to keep in mind the need
to beg Jehovah not to bring us into temptation
and to guide us so that we’ll be delivered
from this wicked one
who wants to exploit the fact that we have
a treacherous,
traitorous figurative heart
that can ruin our relationship
with Jehovah personally.
Now, the apostle Paul recognized this,
and it’s quite interesting what he wrote
to his beloved brothers
in Thessalonians, that first letter.
So if you’d find 1 Thessalonians,
in chapter 3,
I found this quite revealing.
And tying in with the thought
of accepting the facts
about how our figurative heart
safeguards our relationship
with our God and Father, Jehovah,
at 1 Thessalonians 3:5,
Paul writes: “That is why,
when I could bear it no longer,
“I sent to learn of your faithfulness,
“[now notice] in case somehow
“the Tempter might have tempted you,
and our labor
might have turned out to be in vain.”
So he didn’t get into any specific detail.
But it helps us to appreciate
that there’s this danger that somehow
the Tempter, Satan the Devil,
might tempt us,
and this is connected with the need to beg
Jehovah to deliver us, or rescue us,
from the wicked one
in his effort to tempt us to break our integrity
and have our cherished relationship
with Jehovah be damaged.
So he knows the heart is treacherous.
And whoever we are and however long
we’ve been in the truth,
remember what Paul wrote to the Thessalonians
—“somehow”—
because he’s always looking
to somehow lead us
into breaking our integrity to Jehovah God.
Now, if you think of Revelation chapter 12
and where we are in this stream of time,
(this occurred to me
when preparing these thoughts here)
Revelation chapter 12
has very familiar thoughts here.
The Devil is expelled from the heavens,
he and the demons, and notice
the familiar verse 12
of Revelation chapter 12:
‘On this account be glad, you heavens
and [boy, they’re rejoicing]
those that reside in them!’
And that’s an exclamation.
Notice, though:
“Woe for the earth and for the sea,
“because the Devil has come down to you,
having great anger,
knowing that he has a short period of time.”
Well, if that was true
after he was ousted from the heavens,
what do you think about now?
So it’s sobering.
We want to safeguard
our relationship with Jehovah
because notice verse 17 of the same chapter:
“So the dragon became enraged.”
Great anger—he’s enraged,
and he’s waging war with the remnant,
as it brings out here.
And those that observe
the commandments of God
—anyone supporting the remnant—
this is a war.
And the war
is that he’s out to somehow
cause us to break our integrity to our precious
heavenly Father,
so this helps us to appreciate that,
even though it was long before
the thoughts here in Revelation
and what Jesus taught us.
In Proverbs chapter 4,
it still helps us:
“More than all else that is to be guarded,
safeguard your heart,
for out of it are the sources of life.”
So even back then,
there was the recognition
that we have to safeguard our heart
and accept the fact that our heart,
our figurative heart, is treacherous
—that’ll safeguard our precious relationship
with Jehovah God.
Now, to help us with that,
notice what Paul wrote
—very familiar verses in 2 Timothy chapter 3.
And we’ve used this
in the ministry many times,
and yet think about it as it connects
with safeguarding our hearts
and accepting the fact that it’s treacherous
—that we won’t break our integrity
or allow the Devil
to somehow cause us to break our integrity.
Second Timothy chapter 3
and you’ll notice what we’re emphasizing here.
The fact is in verse 16:
“All Scripture is inspired of God.”
But notice the benefits.
So it’s “for teaching,” it’s “for reproving,”
“setting things straight”
—see the point here, though?—
“for disciplining in righteousness.”
So you think of that maybe on your Bible study.
‘I use the Bible to discipline
my Bible study to get God’s thinking.’
And it’s appropriate that elders
use the Scriptures to discipline.
However, we want to emphasize here for you
that when you’re doing your
personal Bible reading (many of us),
let the Scriptures discipline
that treacherous heart.
It’s a mirror.
When something hits you
because maybe you’ve had wrong thinking
(could be all sorts of things,
anything that could lead us astray
and cause us to break our integrity),
just face the fact.
It’s just between you and Jehovah.
You’re reading it,
and let it discipline you in righteousness.
And that’s what’s going
to enable us to protect
our precious relationship
with Jehovah God.
So we all have to face that fact,
as we mentioned,
our figurative heart is treacherous;
it’s a traitor.
What’s wonderful is we’re confident
that Jehovah loves us.
So when he made that estimation in Jeremiah,
it’s motivated by his love.
So that helps us to protect
our relationship with him
—facing that fact.
That’s the way it is.
So indeed, we accept the fact
about our figurative heart,
but we’re determined
to protect and safeguard
our precious relationship with Jehovah God.